CHAPTER EIGHT

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS

8.1

8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6

Introduction
Stress and strain
Hooke’s law
Stress-strain curve
Elastic moduli
Applications of elastic
behaviour of materials
Summary
Points to ponder
Exercises

INTRODUCTION

In Chapter 6, we studied the rotation of the bodies and then
realised that the motion of a body depends on how mass is
distributed within the body. We restricted ourselves to simpler
situations of rigid bodies. A rigid body generally means a
hard solid object having a definite shape and size. But in
reality, bodies can be stretched, compressed and bent. Even
the appreciably rigid steel bar can be deformed when a
sufficiently large external force is applied on it. This means
that solid bodies are not perfectly rigid.
A solid has definite shape and size. In order to change (or
deform) the shape or size of a body, a force is required. If
you stretch a helical spring by gently pulling its ends, the
length of the spring increases slightly. When you leave the
ends of the spring, it regains its original size and shape. The
property of a body, by virtue of which it tends to regain its
original size and shape when the applied force is removed, is
known as elasticity and the deformation caused is known
as elastic deformation. However, if you apply force to a lump
of putty or mud, they have no gross tendency to regain their
previous shape, and they get permanently deformed. Such
substances are called plastic and this property is called
plasticity. Putty and mud are close to ideal plastics.
The elastic behaviour of materials plays an important role
in engineering design. For example, while designing a
building, knowledge of elastic properties of materials like steel,
concrete etc. is essential. The same is true in the design of
bridges, automobiles, ropeways etc. One could also ask —
Can we design an aeroplane which is very light but
sufficiently strong? Can we design an artificial limb which
is lighter but stronger? Why does a railway track have a
particular shape like I? Why is glass brittle while brass is
not? Answers to such questions begin with the study of how
relatively simple kinds of loads or forces act to deform
different solids bodies. In this chapter, we shall study the

Rationalised-2023-24

168

PHYSICS

elastic behaviour and mechanical properties of
solids which would answer many such
questions.
8.2 STRESS AND STRAIN
When forces are applied on a body in such a
manner that the body is still in static equilibrium,
it is deformed to a small or large extent depending
upon the nature of the material of the body and
the magnitude of the deforming force. The
deformation may not be noticeable visually in
many materials but it is there. When a body is
subjected to a deforming force, a restoring force
is developed in the body. This restoring force is
equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to
the applied force. The restoring force per unit area
is known as stress. If F is the force applied normal
to the cross–section and A is the area of cross
section of the body,
Magnitude of the stress = F/A
(8.1)
The SI unit of stress is N m–2 or pascal (Pa)
and its dimensional formula is [ ML–1T–2 ].
There are three ways in which a solid may
change its dimensions when an external force
acts on it. These are shown in Fig. 8.1. In
Fig.8.1(a), a cylinder is stretched by two equal
forces applied normal to its cross-sectional area.
The restoring force per unit area in this case is
called tensile stress. If the cylinder is
compressed under the action of applied forces,
the restoring force per unit area is known as
compressive stress. Tensile or compressive
stress can also be termed as longitudinal stress.
In both the cases, there is a change in the
length of the cylinder. The change in the length
∆L to the original length L of the body (cylinder
in this case) is known as longitudinal strain.

(a)

Fig. 8.1

Longitudinal strain =

∆L
L

(8.2)

However, if two equal and opposite deforming
forces are applied parallel to the cross-sectional
area of the cylinder, as shown in Fig. 8.1(b),
there is relative displacement between the
opposite faces of the cylinder. The restoring force
per unit area developed due to the applied
tangential force is known as tangential or
shearing stress.
As a result of applied tangential force, there
is a relative displacement ∆x between opposite
faces of the cylinder as shown in the Fig. 8.1(b).
The strain so produced is known as shearing
strain and it is defined as the ratio of relative
displacement of the faces ∆x to the length of the
cylinder L.
Shearing strain =

∆x
= tan θ
L

(8.3)

where θ is the angular displacement of the
cylinder from the vertical (original position of the
cylinder). Usually θ is very small, tan θ
is nearly equal to angle θ , (if θ = 10°, for
example, there is only 1% difference between θ
and tan θ).
It can also be visualised, when a book is
pressed with the hand and pushed horizontally,
as shown in Fig. 8.2 (c).
Thus, shearing strain = tan θ ≈ θ
(8.4)
In Fig. 8.1 (d), a solid sphere placed in the fluid
under high pressure is compressed uniformly on
all sides. The force applied by the fluid acts in
perpendicular direction at each point of the
surface and the body is said to be under
hydraulic compression. This leads to decrease

(b)

(c)

(d)

(a) A cylindrical body under tensile stress elongates by ∆L (b) Shearing stress on a cylinder deforming it by
an angle θ (c) A body subjected to shearing stress (d) A solid body under a stress normal to the surface at
every point (hydraulic stress). The volumetric strain is ∆V/V, but there is no change in shape.

Rationalised-2023-24

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS

169

in its volume without any change of its
geometrical shape.
The body develops internal restoring forces
that are equal and opposite to the forces applied
by the fluid (the body restores its original shape
and size when taken out from the fluid). The
internal restoring force per unit area in this case
is known as hydraulic stress and in magnitude
is equal to the hydraulic pressure (applied force
per unit area).
The strain produced by a hydraulic pressure
is called volume strain and is defined as the
ratio of change in volume (∆V) to the original
volume (V ).
Volume strain =

∆V
V

compression and shear stress may also be
obtained. The stress-strain curves vary from
material to material. These curves help us to
understand how a given material deforms with
increasing loads. From the graph, we can see
that in the region between O to A, the curve is
linear. In this region, Hooke’s law is obeyed.
The body regains its original dimensions when
the applied force is removed. In this region, the
solid behaves as an elastic body.

(8.5)

Since the strain is a ratio of change in
dimension to the original dimension, it has no
units or dimensional formula.
8.3 HOOKE’S LAW
Stress and strain take different forms in the
situations depicted in the Fig. (8.1). For small
deformations the stress and strain are
proportional to each other. This is known as
Hooke’s law.
Thus,
stress ∝ strain
stress = k × strain
(8.6)
where k is the proportionality constant and is
known as modulus of elasticity.
Hooke’s law is an empirical law and is found
to be valid for most materials. However, there
are some materials which do not exhibit this
linear relationship.
8.4 STRESS-STRAIN CURVE
The relation between the stress and the strain
for a given material under tensile stress can be
found experimentally. In a standard test of
tensile properties, a test cylinder or a wire is
stretched by an applied force. The fractional
change in length (the strain) and the applied
force needed to cause the strain are recorded.
The applied force is gradually increased in steps
and the change in length is noted. A graph is
plotted between the stress (which is equal in
magnitude to the applied force per unit area) and
the strain produced. A typical graph for a metal
is shown in Fig. 8.2. Analogous graphs for

Fig. 8.2 A typical stress-strain curve for a metal.

In the region from A to B, stress and strain
are not proportional. Nevertheless, the body still
returns to its original dimension when the load
is removed. The point B in the curve is known
as yield point (also known as elastic limit) and
the corresponding stress is known as yield
strength (σy ) of the material.
If the load is increased further, the stress
developed exceeds the yield strength and strain
increases rapidly even for a small change in the
stress. The portion of the curve between B and
D shows this. When the load is removed, say at
some point C between B and D, the body does
not regain its original dimension. In this case,
even when the stress is zero, the strain is not
zero. The material is said to have a permanent
set. The deformation is said to be plastic
deformation. The point D on the graph is the
ultimate tensile strength (σu ) of the material.
Beyond this point, additional strain is produced
even by a reduced applied force and fracture
occurs at point E. If the ultimate strength and
fracture points D and E are close, the material
is said to be brittle. If they are far apart, the
material is said to be ductile.

Rationalised-2023-24

170

PHYSICS

8.5 ELASTIC MODULI
The proportional region within the elastic limit
of the stress-strain curve (region OA in Fig. 8.2)
is of great importance for structural and
manufacturing engineering designs. The ratio
of stress and strain, called modulus of elasticity,
is found to be a characteristic of the material.
8.5.1 Young’s Modulus

Fig. 8.3

Stress-strain curve for the elastic tissue of
Aorta, the large tube (vessel) carrying blood
from the heart.

As stated earlier, the stress-strain behaviour
varies from material to material. For example,
rubber can be pulled to several times its original
length and still returns to its original shape. Fig.
8.3 shows stress-strain curve for the elastic
tissue of aorta, present in the heart. Note that
although elastic region is very large, the material
does not obey Hooke’s law over most of the region.
Secondly, there is no well defined plastic region.
Substances like tissue of aorta, rubber etc.
which can be stretched to cause large strains
are called elastomers.

Experimental observation show that for a given
material, the magnitude of the strain produced
is same whether the stress is tensile or
compressive. The ratio of tensile (or compressive)
stress (σ ) to the longitudinal strain (ε) is defined as
Young’s modulus and is denoted by the symbol Y.
Y=

σ
ε

(8.7)

From Eqs. (8.1) and (8.2), we have
Y = (F/A)/(∆L/L)
(8.8)
= (F × L) /(A × ∆L)
Since strain is a dimensionless quantity, the
unit of Young’s modulus is the same as that of
stress i.e., N m–2 or Pascal (Pa). Table 8.1 gives
the values of Young’s moduli and yield strengths
of some material.
From the data given in Table 8.1, it is noticed
that for metals Young’s moduli are large.

Table 8.1 Young’s moduli and yield strenghs of some material

# Substance tested under compression

Rationalised-2023-24

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS

171

Therefore, these materials require a large force
to produce small change in length. To increase
the length of a thin steel wire of 0.1 cm2 crosssectional area by 0.1%, a force of 2000 N is
required. The force required to produce the same
strain in aluminium, brass and copper wires
having the same cross-sectional area are 690 N,
900 N and 1100 N respectively. It means that
steel is more elastic than copper, brass and
aluminium. It is for this reason that steel is
preferred in heavy-duty machines and in
structural designs. Wood, bone, concrete and
glass have rather small Young’s moduli.
u Example 8.1 A structural steel rod has a
radius of 10 mm and a length of 1.0 m. A
100 kN force stretches it along its length.
Calculate (a) stress, (b) elongation, and (c)
strain on the rod. Young’s modulus, of
structural steel is 2.0 × 1011 N m-2.

Answer We assume that the rod is held by a
clamp at one end, and the force F is applied at
the other end, parallel to the length of the rod.
Then the stress on the rod is given by
Stress =

F
A

=

F
πr

2

100 × 10 N
3

=

(

3.14 × 10

−2

)

2

m

= 3.18 × 108 N m–2
The elongation,
∆L =

( F/A ) L
Y

(3.18 × 10 N m ) (1m )
8

=

11

2 × 10

Answer The copper and steel wires are under
a tensile stress because they have the same
tension (equal to the load W) and the same area
of cross-section A. From Eq. (8.7) we have stress
= strain × Young’s modulus. Therefore
W/A = Yc × (∆Lc/Lc) = Ys × (∆Ls/Ls)
where the subscripts c and s refer to copper
and stainless steel respectively. Or,
∆Lc/∆Ls = (Ys/Yc) × (Lc/Ls)
Given Lc = 2.2 m, Ls = 1.6 m,
From Table 9.1 Yc = 1.1 × 1011 N.m–2, and
Ys = 2.0 × 1011 N.m–2.
11
∆Lc/∆Ls = (2.0 × 10 /1.1 × 1011) × (2.2/1.6) = 2.5.
The total elongation is given to be
∆Lc + ∆Ls = 7.0 × 10-4 m
Solving the above equations,
∆Lc = 5.0 × 10-4 m, and ∆Ls = 2.0 × 10-4 m.
Therefore
W = (A × Yc × ∆Lc)/Lc
= π (1.5 × 10-3)2 × [(5.0 × 10-4 × 1.1 × 1011)/2.2]
= 1.8 × 102 N
⊳
uExample 8.3 In a human pyramid in a
circus, the entire weight of the balanced
group is supported by the legs of a performer
who is lying on his back (as shown in Fig.
8.4). The combined mass of all the persons
performing the act, and the tables, plaques
etc. involved is 280 kg. The mass of the
performer lying on his back at the bottom of
the pyramid is 60 kg. Each thighbone (femur)
of this performer has a length of 50 cm and
an effective radius of 2.0 cm. Determine the
amount by which each thighbone gets
compressed under the extra load.

–2

N m

–2

= 1.59 × 10–3 m
= 1.59 mm
The strain is given by
Strain = ∆L/L
= (1.59 × 10–3 m)/(1m)
= 1.59 × 10–3
= 0.16 %
u Example 8.2 A copper wire of length 2.2 m
and a steel wire of length 1.6 m, both of
diameter 3.0 mm, are connected end to end.
When stretched by a load, the net
elongation is found to be 0.70 mm. Obtain
the load applied.

⊳

Fig. 8.4 Human pyramid in a circus.

Rationalised-2023-24

172

PHYSICS

Answer Total mass of all the performers, tables,
plaques etc.
= 280 kg
Mass of the performer = 60 kg
Mass supported by the legs of the performer
at the bottom of the pyramid
= 280 – 60 = 220 kg
Weight of this supported mass
= 220 kg wt. = 220 × 9.8 N = 2156 N.
Weight supported by each thighbone of the
performer = ½ (2156) N = 1078 N.
From Table 9.1, the Young’s modulus for bone
is given by
Y
=
9.4 × 109 N m–2.
Length of each thighbone L = 0.5 m
the radius of thighbone = 2.0 cm
Thus the cross-sectional area of the thighbone
A = π × (2 × 10-2)2 m2 = 1.26 × 10-3 m2.
Using Eq. (9.8), the compression in each
thighbone (∆L) can be computed as
∆L = [(F × L)/(Y × A)]
= [(1078 × 0.5)/(9.4 × 109 × 1.26 × 10-3)]
= 4.55 × 10-5 m or 4.55 × 10-3 cm.
This is a very small change! The fractional
decrease in the thighbone is ∆L/L = 0.000091 or
0.0091%.
⊳
8.5.2 Shear Modulus
The ratio of shearing stress to the corresponding
shearing strain is called the shear modulus of
the material and is represented by G. It is also
called the modulus of rigidity.
G = shearing stress (σs)/shearing strain
G = (F/A)/(∆x/L)
= (F × L)/(A × ∆x)
(8.10)
Similarly, from Eq. (9.4)
G = (F/A)/θ
= F/(A × θ)
(8.11)
The shearing stress σs can also be expressed as
σs = G × θ
(8.12)
SI unit of shear modulus is N m–2 or Pa. The
shear moduli of a few common materials are
given in Table 9.2. It can be seen that shear
modulus (or modulus of rigidity) is generally less
than Young’s modulus (from Table 9.1). For most
materials G ≈ Y/3.

Table 8.2

Shear moduli (G) of some common
materials

Material

G (109 Nm–2
or GPa)

Aluminium
Brass
Copper
Glass
Iron
Lead
Nickel
Steel
Tungsten
Wood

25
36
42
23
70
5.6
77
84
150
10

u Example 8.4 A square lead slab of side 50
cm and thickness 10 cm is subject to a
shearing force (on its narrow face) of 9.0 ×
104 N. The lower edge is riveted to the floor.
How much will the upper edge be displaced?

Answer The lead slab is fixed and the force is
applied parallel to the narrow face as shown in
Fig. 8.6. The area of the face parallel to which
this force is applied is
A = 50 cm × 10 cm
= 0.5 m × 0.1 m
= 0.05 m2
Therefore, the stress applied is
= (9.4 × 104 N/0.05 m2)
= 1.80 × 106 N.m–2

aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
Fig. 8.5

We know that shearing strain = (∆x/L)= Stress /G.
Therefore the displacement ∆x = (Stress × L)/G
= (1.8 × 106 N m–2 × 0.5m)/(5.6 × 109 N m–2)
= 1.6 × 10–4 m = 0.16 mm
⊳

Rationalised-2023-24

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS

173

Table 8.3

8.5.3 Bulk Modulus
In Section (8.3), we have seen that when a body
is submerged in a fluid, it undergoes a hydraulic
stress (equal in magnitude to the hydraulic
pressure). This leads to the decrease in the
volume of the body thus producing a strain called
volume strain [Eq. (8.5)]. The ratio of hydraulic
stress to the corresponding hydraulic strain is
called bulk modulus. It is denoted by symbol B.
B = – p/(∆V/V)
(8.12)
The negative sign indicates the fact that with
an increase in pressure, a decrease in volume
occurs. That is, if p is positive, ∆V is negative.
Thus for a system in equilibrium, the value of
bulk modulus B is always positive. SI unit of
bulk modulus is the same as that of pressure
i.e., N m–2 or Pa. The bulk moduli of a few common
materials are given in Table 8.3.
The reciprocal of the bulk modulus is called
compressibility and is denoted by k. It is defined
as the fractional change in volume per unit
increase in pressure.
k = (1/B) = – (1/∆p) × (∆V/V)
(8.13)
It can be seen from the data given in Table
8.3 that the bulk moduli for solids are much
larger than for liquids, which are again much
larger than the bulk modulus for gases (air).

Bulk moduli (B) of some common
Materials

Material
Solids

B (109 N m–2 or GPa)

Aluminium

72

Brass

61

Copper

140

Glass

37

Iron

100

Nickel

260

Steel

160

Liquids
Water

2.2

Ethanol

0.9

Carbon disulphide

1.56

Glycerine

4.76

Mercury

25

Gases
1.0 × 10–4

Air (at STP)

Table 8.4 Stress, strain and various elastic moduli
Type of
stress

Stress

Strain

Change in
shape volume

Elastic
Modulus

Name of
Modulus

State of
Matter

Tensile
or
compressive
(σ = F/A)

Two equal and
opposite forces
perpendicular to
opposite faces

Elongation or
compression
parallel to force
direction (∆L/L)
(longitudinal strain)

Yes

No

Y = (F×L)/
(A×∆L)

Young’s
modulus

Solid

Shearing
(σs = F/A)

Two equal and
opposite forces
parallel to oppoiste
surfaces forces
in each case such
that total force and
total torque on the
body vanishes

Pure shear, θ

Yes

No

G = F/(A×θ)

Hydraulic

Forces perpendicular
everywhere to the
surface, force per
unit area (pressure)
same everywhere.

Volume change
(compression or
elongation)
(∆V/V)

No

Yes

B = –p/(∆V/V) Bulk
modulus

Rationalised-2023-24

Shear
Solid
modulus
or modulus
of rigidity

Solid, liquid
and gas

174

PHYSICS

Thus, solids are the least compressible, whereas,
gases are the most compressible. Gases are about
a million times more compressible than solids!
Gases have large compressibilities, which vary
with pressure and temperature. The
incompressibility of the solids is primarily due
to the tight coupling between the neighbouring
atoms. The molecules in liquids are also bound
with their neighbours but not as strong as in
solids. Molecules in gases are very poorly
coupled to their neighbours.
Table 8.4 shows the various types of stress,
strain, elastic moduli, and the applicable state
of matter at a glance.
u Example 8.5 The average depth of Indian
Ocean is about 3000 m. Calculate the
fractional compression, ∆V/V, of water at
the bottom of the ocean, given that the bulk
modulus of water is 2.2 × 109 N m–2. (Take
g = 10 m s–2)

Answer The pressure exerted by a 3000 m
column of water on the bottom layer
p = hρ g = 3000 m × 1000 kg m–3 × 10 m s–2
= 3 × 107 kg m–1 s-2
= 3 × 107 N m–2
Fractional compression ∆V/V, is
∆V/V = stress/B = (3 × 107 N m-2)/(2.2 × 109 N m–2)
= 1.36 × 10-2 or 1.36 %
⊳

8.5.5 Elastic Potential Energy
in a Stretched Wire
When a wire is put under a tensile stress, work
is done against the inter-atomic forces. This
work is stored in the wire in the form of elastic
potential energy. When a wire of original length
L and area of cross-section A is subjected to a
deforming force F along the length of the wire,
let the length of the wire be elongated by l. Then
from Eq. (8.8), we have F = YA × (l/L). Here Y is
the Young’s modulus of the material of the wire.
Now for a further elongation of infinitesimal
small length dl, work done dW is F × dl or YAldl/
L. Therefore, the amount of work done (W) in
increasing the length of the wire from L to L + l,
that is from l = 0 to l = l is
W= ∫

0

YAl
YA l 2
dl =
×
L
2
L
2

1
l 
W = × Y ×   × AL
2
L 
1
= × Young’s modulus × strain2 ×
2
volume of the wire

1
× stress × strain × volume of the
2
wire
This work is stored in the wire in the form of
elastic potential energy (U). Therefore the elastic
potential energy per unit volume of the wire (u) is
=

8.5.4 POISSON’S RATIO

u=

The strain perpendicular to the applied force is
called lateral strain. Simon Poisson pointed out
that within the elastic limit, lateral strain is
directly proportional to the longitudinal strain.
The ratio of the lateral strain to the longitudinal
strain in a stretched wire is called Poisson’s
ratio. If the original diameter of the wire is d
and the contraction of the diameter under stress
is ∆d, the lateral strain is ∆d/d. If the original
length of the wire is L and the elongation under
stress is ∆L, the longitudinal strain is ∆L/L.
Poisson’s ratio is then (∆d/d)/(∆L/L) or (∆d/∆L)
× (L/d). Poisson’s ratio is a ratio of two strains;
it is a pure number and has no dimensions or
units. Its value depends only on the nature of
material. For steels the value is between 0.28 and
0.30, and for aluminium alloys it is about 0.33.

l

8.6

1
×σ ε
2

(8.14)

APPLICATIONS OF ELASTIC
BEHAVIOUR OF MATERIALS

The elastic behaviour of materials plays an
important role in everyday life. All engineering
designs require precise knowledge of the elastic
behaviour of materials. For example while
designing a building, the structural design of
the columns, beams and supports require
knowledge of strength of materials used. Have
you ever thought why the beams used in
construction of bridges, as supports etc. have
a cross-section of the type I? Why does a heap
of sand or a hill have a pyramidal shape?
Answers to these questions can be obtained
from the study of structural engineering which
is based on concepts developed here.

Rationalised-2023-24

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS

175

Cranes used for lifting and moving heavy loads
from one place to another have a thick metal
rope to which the load is attached. The rope is
pulled up using pulleys and motors. Suppose we
want to make a crane, which has a lifting
capacity of 10 tonnes or metric tons (1 metric
ton = 1000 kg). How thick should the steel rope
be? We obviously want that the load does not
deform the rope permanently. Therefore, the
extension should not exceed the elastic limit.
From Table 8.1, we find that mild steel has a
yield strength (σy) of about 300 × 106 N m–2. Thus,
the area of cross-section (A) of the rope should
at least be
A ≥ W/σy = Mg/σy
(8.15)
= (104 kg × 9.8 m s-2)/(300 × 106 N m-2)
= 3.3 × 10-4 m2
corresponding to a radius of about 1 cm for a
rope of circular cross-section. Generally a
large margin of safety (of about a factor of ten
in the load) is provided. Thus a thicker rope of
radius about 3 cm is recommended. A single
wire of this radius would practically be a rigid
rod. So the ropes are always made of a number
of thin wires braided together, like in pigtails,
for ease in manufacture, flexibility and strength.
A bridge has to be designed such that it can
withstand the load of the flowing traffic, the force
of winds and its own weight. Similarly, in the
design of buildings the use of beams and columns
is very common. In both the cases, the
overcoming of the problem of bending of beam
under a load is of prime importance. The beam
should not bend too much or break. Let us
consider the case of a beam loaded at the centre
and supported near its ends as shown in
Fig. 8.6. A bar of length l, breadth b, and depth
d when loaded at the centre by a load W sags by
an amount given by

δ = W l 3/(4bd 3Y)

Fig. 8.6

This relation can be derived using what you
have already learnt and a little calculus. From
Eq. (8.16), we see that to reduce the bending
for a given load, one should use a material with
a large Young’s modulus Y. For a given material,
increasing the depth d rather than the breadth
b is more effective in reducing the bending, since
δ is proportional to d -3 and only to b-1(of course
the length l of the span should be as small as
possible). But on increasing the depth, unless
the load is exactly at the right place (difficult to
arrange in a bridge with moving traffic), the
deep bar may bend as shown in Fig. 8.7(b). This
is called buckling. To avoid this, a common
compromise is the cross-sectional shape shown
in Fig. 8.7(c). This section provides a large loadbearing surface and enough depth to prevent
bending. This shape reduces the weight of the
beam without sacrificing the strength and
hence reduces the cost.

(a)

Fig. 8.7

(8.16)

A beam supported at the ends and loaded
at the centre.

(b)

(c)

Different cross-sectional shapes of a
beam. (a) Rectangular section of a bar;
(b) A thin bar and how it can buckle;
(c) Commonly used section for a load
bearing bar.

The use of pillars or columns is also very
common in buildings and bridges. A pillar with
rounded ends as shown in Fig. 8.9(a) supports
less load than that with a distributed shape at
the ends [Fig. 8.9(b)]. The precise design of a
bridge or a building has to take into account
the conditions under which it will function, the
cost and long period, reliability of usable
material, etc.

Rationalised-2023-24

176

PHYSICS

(a)

Fig. 8.8

(b)

Pillars or columns: (a) a pillar with rounded
ends, (b) Pillar with distributed ends.

The answer to the question why the maximum
height of a mountain on earth is ~10 km can
also be provided by considering the elastic
properties of rocks. A mountain base is not under
uniform compression and this provides some

shearing stress to the rocks under which they
can flow. The stress due to all the material on
the top should be less than the critical shearing
stress at which the rocks flow.
At the bottom of a mountain of height h, the
force per unit area due to the weight of the
mountain is hρg where ρ is the density of the
material of the mountain and g is the acceleration
due to gravity. The material at the bottom
experiences this force in the vertical direction,
and the sides of the mountain are free. Therefore,
this is not a case of pressure or bulk compression.
There is a shear component, approximately hρg
itself. Now the elastic limit for a typical rock is
30 × 107 N m-2 . Equating this to hρg, with
ρ = 3 × 103 kg m-3 gives
hρg = 30 × 107 N m-2 .
h
= 30 × 107 N m-2/(3 × 103 kg m-3 × 10 m s-2)
= 10 km
which is more than the height of Mt. Everest!

SUMMARY
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Stress is the restoring force per unit area and strain is the fractional change in dimension.
In general there are three types of stresses (a) tensile stress — longitudinal stress
(associated with stretching) or compressive stress (associated with compression),
(b) shearing stress, and (c) hydraulic stress.
For small deformations, stress is directly proportional to the strain for many materials.
This is known as Hooke’s law. The constant of proportionality is called modulus of
elasticity. Three elastic moduli viz., Young’s modulus, shear modulus and bulk modulus
are used to describe the elastic behaviour of objects as they respond to deforming forces
that act on them.
A class of solids called elastomers does not obey Hooke’s law.
When an object is under tension or compression, the Hooke’s law takes the form
F/A = Y∆L/L
where ∆L/L is the tensile or compressive strain of the object, F is the magnitude of the
applied force causing the strain, A is the cross-sectional area over which F is applied
(perpendicular to A) and Y is the Young’s modulus for the object. The stress is F/A.
A pair of forces when applied parallel to the upper and lower faces, the solid deforms so
that the upper face moves sideways with respect to the lower. The horizontal displacement
∆L of the upper face is perpendicular to the vertical height L. This type of deformation is
called shear and the corresponding stress is the shearing stress. This type of stress is
possible only in solids.
In this kind of deformation the Hooke’s law takes the form
F/A = G × ∆L/L
where ∆L is the displacement of one end of object in the direction of the applied force F,
and G is the shear modulus.
When an object undergoes hydraulic compression due to a stress exerted by a surrounding
fluid, the Hooke’s law takes the form
p = B (∆V/V),
where p is the pressure (hydraulic stress) on the object due to the fluid, ∆V/V (the
volume strain) is the absolute fractional change in the object’s volume due to that
pressure and B is the bulk modulus of the object.

Rationalised-2023-24

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS

177

POINTS TO PONDER
1.

In the case of a wire, suspended from celing and stretched under the action of a weight (F)
suspended from its other end, the force exerted by the ceiling on it is equal and opposite to
the weight. However, the tension at any cross-section A of the wire is just F and not 2F.
Hence, tensile stress which is equal to the tension per unit area is equal to F/A.

2.

Hooke’s law is valid only in the linear part of stress-strain curve.

3.

The Young’s modulus and shear modulus are relevant only for solids since only solids
have lengths and shapes.

4.

Bulk modulus is relevant for solids, liquid and gases. It refers to the change in volume
when every part of the body is under the uniform stress so that the shape of the body
remains unchanged.

5.

Metals have larger values of Young’s modulus than alloys and elastomers. A material
with large value of Young’s modulus requires a large force to produce small changes in its
length.

6.

In daily life, we feel that a material which stretches more is more elastic, but it a is
misnomer. In fact material which stretches to a lesser extent for a given load is considered
to be more elastic.

7.

In general, a deforming force in one direction can produce strains in other directions
also. The proportionality between stress and strain in such situations cannot be described
by just one elastic constant. For example, for a wire under longitudinal strain, the
lateral dimensions (radius of cross section) will undergo a small change, which is described
by another elastic constant of the material (called Poisson ratio).

8.

Stress is not a vector quantity since, unlike a force, the stress cannot be assigned a
specific direction. Force acting on the portion of a body on a specified side of a section
has a definite direction.
EXERCISES

8.1

A steel wire of length 4.7 m and cross-sectional area 3.0 × 10-5 m2 stretches by the same
amount as a copper wire of length 3.5 m and cross-sectional area of 4.0 × 10–5 m2 under
a given load. What is the ratio of the Young’s modulus of steel to that of copper?

8.2

Figure 8.9 shows the strain-stress curve for a given material. What are (a) Young’s
modulus and (b) approximate yield strength for this material?

Fig. 8.9

Rationalised-2023-24

178

PHYSICS

8.3

The stress-strain graphs for materials A and B are shown in Fig. 8.10.

Fig. 8.10
The graphs are drawn to the same scale.
(a) Which of the materials has the greater Young’s modulus?
(b) Which of the two is the stronger material?
8.4

Read the following two statements below carefully and state, with reasons, if it is true
or false.
(a) The Young’s modulus of rubber is greater than that of steel;
(b) The stretching of a coil is determined by its shear modulus.

8.5

Two wires of diameter 0.25 cm, one made of steel and the other made of brass are loaded
as shown in Fig. 8.11. The unloaded length of steel wire is 1.5 m and that of brass wire
is 1.0 m. Compute the elongations of the steel and the brass wires.

Fig. 8.11
The edge of an aluminium cube is 10 cm long. One face of the cube is firmly fixed to a
vertical wall. A mass of 100 kg is then attached to the opposite face of the cube. The
shear modulus of aluminium is 25 GPa. What is the vertical deflection of this face?
8.7 Four identical hollow cylindrical columns of mild steel support a big structure of mass
50,000 kg. The inner and outer radii of each column are 30 and 60 cm respectively.
Assuming the load distribution to be uniform, calculate the compressional strain of
each column.
8.8 A piece of copper having a rectangular cross-section of 15.2 mm × 19.1 mm is pulled in
tension with 44,500 N force, producing only elastic deformation. Calculate the resulting
strain?
8.9 A steel cable with a radius of 1.5 cm supports a chairlift at a ski area. If the maximum
stress is not to exceed 108 N m–2, what is the maximum load the cable can support ?
8.10 A rigid bar of mass 15 kg is supported symmetrically by three wires each 2.0 m long.
Those at each end are of copper and the middle one is of iron. Determine the ratios of
their diameters if each is to have the same tension.
8.11 A 14.5 kg mass, fastened to the end of a steel wire of unstretched length 1.0 m, is
whirled in a vertical circle with an angular velocity of 2 rev/s at the bottom of the circle.
The cross-sectional area of the wire is 0.065 cm2. Calculate the elongation of the wire
when the mass is at the lowest point of its path.
8.6

Rationalised-2023-24

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS

179

8.12 Compute the bulk modulus of water from the following data: Initial volume = 100.0
litre, Pressure increase = 100.0 atm (1 atm = 1.013 × 105 Pa), Final volume = 100.5 litre.
Compare the bulk modulus of water with that of air (at constant temperature). Explain
in simple terms why the ratio is so large.
8.13 What is the density of water at a depth where pressure is 80.0 atm, given that its
density at the surface is 1.03 × 103 kg m–3?
8.14 Compute the fractional change in volume of a glass slab, when subjected to a hydraulic
pressure of 10 atm.
8.15 Determine the volume contraction of a solid copper cube, 10 cm on an edge, when
subjected to a hydraulic pressure of 7.0 × 106 Pa.
8.16 How much should the pressure on a litre of water be changed to compress it by 0.10%?
carry one quarter of the load.

Rationalised-2023-24

